---
layout: post
title: "7 tips for a successful remote meeting"
date: 2016-06-25 11:08:19 -0500
comments: true
published: false
description: Here are seven tips for having successful remote meetings.
keywords: 'csv, keywords, here'
categories: 
- remote
---

As I mentioned in my [Tips for working from home]() article, I've been
working remotely for nearly three years. In those three years I've
been in countless meetings, both productive and unproductive. Remote
meetings face many of the same challenges of in-person meetings but
they also have some unique challenges. There are also some things you
can do with remote meetings that are difficult to do with in-person
meetings. Below are some tips for having a successful remote
meeting. Many of them apply to in-person meetings as well.

### Have an agenda

Having an agenda makes a huge difference. When planning a meeting, you
should write out some sort of agenda. At a minimum write down the
topics to be discussed. Try to write enough where someone invited to
the meeting can read it and have an idea about what the meeting is
about.

This agenda should be sent out with the meeting invite. This lets the
invitees know what the meeting is about and gives them time to think
about what might be discussed. It also provides an opportunity for
them to reach out and either exclude themselves from the meeting or
suggest a person that should be included in the discussion.

When you get into the meeting use the agenda to lead discussion. Start
with your first topic and work your way through the remainder.

### Start and end on time

You need to be protective about your time and your fellow meeting
attendees time. Start your meetings on time and end them on time. Keep
your eye on the clock and wind down the meeting as you get near the
finishing time. If you need to continue discussions, try to break the
group into focused smaller groups that can wrap up particular topics
without requiring the entire group.

### Use video chat

Even if you've worked in an office, you've probably been in a meeting
with vendors, clients, or remote office where you've had to dial in to
group audio chat. This is typically a terrible experience. Without
body language, it is near impossible to tell when someone is about to
start speaking and as a result there are awkward pauses while everyone
waits for someone to speak and there are times when mulptiple people
try to speak at the same time. Its terrible.

This is I recommend using video chat. Video conferences allow you to
see the other people on the call and you can pick up on physical
cues. These cues make all the difference and vastly improves
communication in the meeting.

### Co-located attendees should use their own device

Sometimes you'll have a mixed meeting, some of the attendees are by
themselves not in an office and others are together in an office. The
co-located atendees should each use their own device to connect to the
meeting.

Sharing a single device leads to non-optimal display of almost
everyone using that device. They have a hard time seeing the remote
employees and the remote employees have a hard time seeing the
co-located employees. It also often leads to a situation where some of
the co-located atendees can be heard well by the remote employees anad
others cannot be heard at all. The co-located employees will most
likely need to mute when not talking or use headsets to prevent
feedback.

### Ignore distractions

Hopefully you've invited just the right people to the meeting and, as
a result, everyone is engaged in the discussion and paying
attention. Realistically this doesn't happen. Computers are incredibly
good at so many things and one of those things is distracting its user.

When you're attending a remote meeting, minimize what can distract
you. Close your email and hide the chat program. Put your phone out of
arms reach. Try to focus intently on the meeting. If you find yourself
not paying attention and not contributing take this as a signal that
you shouldn't be in this meeting. If nothing on the rest of the agenda
seems like it requires you, then leave the meeting and be more
selective about what you join in the future.
 
### Have a shared artifact

I think this is one of the more more important tips in this list and
is one of the aspects of remote meetings that works better than
in-person meetings.

When the meeting starts give everyone a link to a shared document that
everyone can edit. It can be useful to seed this document with the
agenda. This shared document is used as a space to explicitly write
down what is being discussed. Writing helps solidify ideas and gives
the group something to reference while having the discussion.

With in-person meetings, this shared artifact is often a whiteboard. A
huge benefit of remote meetings and using something like Google Docs
is that the artifact (document) is editable by everyone at once
(without scrambling for enough markers) and is easily shareable and
persists after the meeting. No more taking pictures of a whiteboard
with a phone and then trying to decipher the terrible handwriting
scribbled out on the whiteboard.

### Assign responsibilities

As the meeting progresses you should be assigning follow-up
responsibilities based on discussions in the meeting. Hopefully your
having a meeting to influence some action and not just hear everyone
talk. Make sure the follow-up actions are explicit and someone or
small group has been assigned to carry through those actions.

This is another area where the shared artifact from above comes in
handy. You can use it to list out who needs to do what and people can
reference it post-meeting.

If you're approaching the end of the meeting, take some time to figure
out follow-up actions for parts of the agenda you haven't covered
yet. Those follow-up actions might not be a continuation of the
current meeting. You might have learned something during the meeting
that changes whatever discussion needs to happen. Try to notice these
changes and see if you can avoid simply making another meeting with
all of the same people.

### End

Meetings are hard. You should do what you can to make them more
successful. If you're being invite to meetings without an agenda,
suggest that an agenda gets made. If you're in a meeting and you can
tell someone is constantly distracted, try nicely calling them out on
it (either privately or in the group). If there isn't a shared
artifact, make one and suggest it to the group. Meetings don't have to
be terrible. We can make them better.

