---
layout: post
title: "The guide to distributed work"
date: 2016-11-16 10:14:11 -0600
comments: true
published: false
description: PUT SUMMARY HERE 
keywords: 'csv, keywords, here'
categories: 
---

Distributed companies are quickly becoming an option for many of
us. Technology improvements, pervasive Internet, and mindset changes
are driving this change. Distributed companies are companies where
nearly all of the employees work remotely; these employees are not
regularly doing work from the same physical location as other
employees.

The number of distributed companies is growing (VERIFY) as technology
is enabling collaboration across distances. With many jobs only
requiring a computer and an Internet connection there are few reasons
to continue to force employees to live in commuting distance to an
office.

Distributed companies offer an opportunity to break free of the
in-person office politics, the forced banter around the water cooler,
and the drudgery of a forced commute.

The remainder of this article highlights some observations over the
last few years of working for distributed companies. These are not
just my observations from working remotely; I've interviewed and
corresponded with many other remote and formerly remote knowledge
workers. Their contributions, along with other readings on distributed
teams, has influenced my thinking about what it means to have a
successful distributed company.

My experience with distributed companies has been in companies that
are distributed but not asynchronous. We had core working hours that
were standardized around one of the middle time zones in the
continental United States. You could live anywhere you wanted but you
needed to be willing to work while others were also working.

Much of the following also applies to individuals working remotely for
a not-entirely-distributed company or team. Being the only remote
individual in a non-remote team comes with its own set of
challenges. My recommendation for this scenario is that if a team has
any remote members, or if members occasionally work remotely, you
should treat that team as a remote team.

# Benefits

If you asked someone that never worked remotely before for the
benefits of working remotely they would probably be able to guess at
some of the more obvious benefits. The top two would be having no
commute and more flexibility in your schedule. Those two advantages
are definitely huge advantages. There are other, less obvious
advantages as well.

## No commute

This is the benefit that most workers, remote and non-remote, identify
when asked about benefits of remote working. This is a huge
benefit. In the United States the average one-way commute is 24
minutes long [TODO: SOURCE NEEDED]. This means the average worker spends
nearly one hour commuting back and forth to an office.

If you expand that to a five day work week than this means that the
average employee is spending five hours a week doing an activity with
the sole purpose of moving between two points. That is over half of a
full work day riding a bicycle, car, train, or bus. In the best case
scenario the employee is using that time to read, listen to a podcast,
or thinking about how to solve a problem. Realistically even if the
commuter is attempting to perform one of those actions, they cannot
focus deeply on it. They have to worry about avoiding accidents,
driving safely, or some other distracting concern.

Commuting has been shown to have negative affects on the commuters
[TODO: LINKS]. Being able to work remotely lets you avoid those
problems.

## Flexibility in schedule

This is another benefit that most people can immediately
identify. Working remotely gives you more power over your
schedule. Even in a synchronous distributed team you gain
flexibility. All of a sudden your work breaks become time you can use
to enrich your non-work life.

Picking or dropping off your children at daycare or school becomes
easier. You can walk your dog easier. You have more time (because of
lack of commute) to make breakfast for you or your family. You can run
errands or go to your favorite lunch spot during the day. Doing this
saves you time since you are going at off-hours compared to most of
the in-office 9-5 workers.

## Customize your work space

You get to choose where you work. For many, this will be in a home
office. This is your space, you get to choose what it is like. 

Do you like to work in a cave? Paint the walls a dark color, block out
the windows and enjoy your cave like experience. Prefer sunlight and
plants? Work near a window and have bring some house plants into your
space. Do you want that awesome sit-stand desk and chair? Buy them
[TODO: Link to other post].

One of my former collegues likes to walk on a treadmill while walking
or, if sitting, he likes having peddles under his desk. These are
customizations he would have a hard time getting at most offices and
they allow him to move more every day.

## Eat the food you want to eat

Many of us have a certain diet we prefer, or are forced, to
follow. Maybe you cannot eat gluten or prefer to follow the Paleo
diet. When you work from your home office you can more easily eat food
you prepare.

When you work from an office you have a few food options. You can
either bring your own food, go out to eat, or (if your employee offers
it) eat food provided by your company. If you follow a restrictive
diet, all of these options are more hassle then making your lunch at
home every day.

Feel like eating food someone else has prepared? You can still do that
while working from home.

## Fewer interruptions

This isn't necessarily true but is most likely true for most remote
workers. As a remote worker you are able to choose where you
work. This gives you the option of choosing a location with fewer
distractions that could remove or prevent you from acheiving a state
of [flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_(psychology\)).

TODO: check that link when rendered ^^^^

## Off hours support

This is a benefit I have not seen other people mention. Off hours
support becomes much easier if you are working remotely. The actions
you would take for an urgent alert at 1 AM are the same actions you
would take at 1 PM.

When you get that 1 AM page you don't have to struggle to remember how
you check production while at home; this is an activity you do on a
regular basis. You know what you need to do. You don't have to
remember how to VPN into your company's network, you do that every day.

## Recruiting

Instead of being limited to your local work force you are able to
recruit from a much wider region. This means you can find the top
skilled workers in whatever technology, tools, or industry your
company is in. This is huge. 

Back in 2012 it was quite difficult to find experienced Clojure
programmers. Because [Outpace](https://outpace.com) was a distributed
company, we were able to hire experts from across the entire United
States. We would not have been able to hire nearly as well if we were
limited to a single location.

## Employee retention

When you are a distributed company (or really, a company that allows
and supports remote work) then you remove one entire reason for an
employee leaving. If an employee needs or wants to move to a new
location then they are able to do that while still working for your
company.

Somtimes, a person needs to move.  Working for a company that supports
remote work allows them to move and not leave the company.

## Reduced office costs

Having a distributed workforce can reduce office costs drastically. In
a fully distributed company it reduces the costs to zero [^1]. When
IBM started encouraging telecommuting [TODO: reference] they saved
[TODO: NUMBER] dollars in office costs.

# Downsides

While the benifits are huge, there are downsides to working
remotely. When I talk to non-remote workers about working remotely,
they typically say something along the lines of "I don't know how you
do it, I'd be so distracted." This touches on one of the downsides of
remote work but it isn't largest one. The rest of this section
describes some of the downsides I (and others I've talked to) observed.

## Loneliness and isolation

When I've talked to other remote workers, even those with fully
distributed teams and companies, this is the main negative they
noticed.

Most of us are social creatures. You do not get the same type of
social interaction with your coworkers when you are working
remotely. Instead of bumping into a wide range of people in the office
you interact with a smaller group, your team, through video chats,
phone calls, chat rooms, and email. Depending on what you are doing,
you might not even get that interaction with a smaller group.

This is very unfamiliar to most of us. We're used to being in physical
proximity to other humans. We're used to having small talk and
grabbing coffee or lunch with other people.

You can combat these feelings by setting up communication with other
employees at your company. Have some chat rooms that are dedicated to
non-work discussions. Have a daily, short video meeting that is a
status check within team so everyone gets to see another persons face
at least once a day. If you work in a city that has other
remote workers from your company, meet up occasionally for a dinner or
happy hour.

If you are having troubles with loneliness and isolation, try to find
an area where you can work where there are other people. Two options
are a coworking space or coffee shop. Alternatively, try to have
social activities you do regularly with other non-coworkers in your
area. Having strong connections with non-coworkers can help combat
loneliness.

Even with the rich connections I have with my fellow coworkers, if I
don't leave my home and see other people every couple days I tend to
get grumpy. I need to make sure I get out and socialize with others at
least every couple of days. This has benefited my rock climbing as
I've made going to the rock climbing gym my main social activity.

## Distractions

This is the downside that non-remote workers often identify. People
assume that television and other things in your home are irresitable
distractions that will cause you to not get work done. In my
experience this isn't a problem.

I'm not sure if people I've worked with are watching television all
day. Given the quality of work I've seen, I have a hard time imagining
they would be able to pay attention to television and produce that
quality of work at the same time.

Roommates, kids, and family interrupting you is another
distraction. You can combat this by setting boundaries. Maybe have a
rule if your office door is closed then you are unavailable. I'd argue
that coworkers interrupting you in an office is as distracting as the
much rarer interruption from someone within your home.

Employees that work remotely are typically making a choice to work
remotely. They know they need to produce quality work and will take
steps to make sure they do.

## Working too much

When you first start working from home you suddenly find yourself
living in the same space that you work. The lack of change of location
and commute makes it easier to keep working. You get invested in a
problem and all of a sudden it is past the time when you really should
stop working.

Even if you stop working on time it is easy to slip back into work
mode. The computer setup I like to use in the evening is in the same
location as my work setup. This made it easy to just take one more
peek at our monitoring dashboards or work email and all of a sudden
realize an hour has passed.

You do do not want to overwork and you do not want your teammates to
overwork. In the short term it can be beneficial. Long term it can
lead to burn out and poor outcomes.

## Fewer interactions

This is both a negative and positive when it comes to working
remotely. When you are working remotely you have fewer random
interactions with random coworkers. You probably interact with your
team plus the same handful of people outside of your team fairly
regularly but rarely interact with others.

In an office, there is a chance you'll run into people outside your
typical circle of communication. You might eat lunch with a wider
variety of people. You may bump into others while getting some coffee
or a snack.

You can help increase interactions on a distributed team by having
some chat rooms that encourage random discussions. Another option is
to have a regular and optional meeting scheduled were people can give
an informal presentation on something that interests them.

# Tools

You will need to select tools that work for distributed teams. Most
tools that are used on a computer or web based can still be used in a
distributed setting. Any physical tools will need to be replaced with
something that works independently of location.

A prime example of this is the classic card wall for tracking work. A
physical wall with actual cards will not work as soon as there is a
single remote employee ona team. Instead of a physical wall, you'll be
pushed to using something like [Trello](https://trello.com)
or [Clubhouse](https://clubhouse.io/).

It is less important to get stuck on a particular tool recommendation
and more important to pay attention to the categories of
tools. Categories of tools tend to be more stable than a specific
recommendation.

## Text chat 

You'll want a chat application. Be careful though, chat applications
can be a huge interuption. [Slack](https://slack.com)
and [HipChat](https://www.hipchat.com) are just two of the many
available services.

## Video conference

Video conferencing is a technology that you should embrace. It is much
better than talking to either an individual or a group on a
phone. Being able to read body language makes communication so much
better. Personally, I've used Google Hangouts
and [Zoom](https://zoom.us) for hundreds of hours each and prefer
Zoom. [appear.in](https://appear.in) is another option that doesn't
require installing anything. There are numerous other options in this space.

## Phone conferences

I'd try to get rid of phone conferences in preference to video
conferences. Video offers so many benefits over phone. I actually
can't recommend any phone conferencing tools but I will mention that
Zoom supports people dialing into a video conference.

## Screen sharing

You'll want to have a way to show another person or group what is on
your screen. It is even better if someone else can take control of
your machine or use their cursor to point towards something on your
screen.

Most of my experience with this is using the feature built-in to Zoom.

## Real-time collaboration on a document

Being able to collectively edit a document with a group is pretty
amazing. [Etherpad](http://etherpad.org/)
and [Google Docs](https://www.google.com/intl/en/docs/about/) are two
options. Most of my experience is with Google Docs.

With a document that supports real-time collaboration you can do
amazing things. You can use it to capture ideas from a remote
group. You can use it to facilitate a remote meeting (this goes really
well once you get the practice of it). If you
open
[this talk](http://idlewords.com/talks/fan_is_a_tool_using_animal.htm)
and search for "Google doc" you'll jump to a slide where you can see
an extreme version if this.

## Whiteboards

Whiteboards are an example of a tool that is always brought up, even
by remote workers, as something that will be missed on a distributed
team. You can find alternative solutions to whiteboards that work with
a remote worker.

One solution is to use Zoom's built-in whiteboard. This works fairly
well. Another is to
use
[Google Drawings](https://drawings.google.com). [Precursor](https://precursorapp.com/) is
a design focused collaborative tool that can also work.

In practice, many distributed workers find that they do not miss
having a whiteboard. Whiteboards are a very convenient tool when
meeting in person but there are other ways of collaborating when
working remotely. Shared documents and screen sharing go a long way
towards enabling collaboration. Tools that work well for remote
collaboration often have another benefit over whiteboards; they are
easier to persist and reference later.

# Communication

Communication is inherently different on a distributed team. All of a
sudden, you cannot just walk across an office to interupt someone and
ask them a question. Communication happens mostly through text. Your
skill at written communication needs to be high.

You lose a lot of context with written communication when compared to
vocal or in person communication. You no longer have body language or
tone of voice to help you interpret what someone means. Losing tone is
huge. Text communication tends to be interpretted more negatively
[TODO: source?] than intended. Try to read text messages with a
positive tone.

It can also be useful to have rules around the expectations of
different forms of communication. How quickly does an email need to be
responded to? How quick should a response be to a chat room meessage?
When should you pick up the phone and call someone?

## Stand-ups

Most of the teams I've been part of, whether distributed or
co-located, have had a daily stand-up meeting. The intention of this
meeting was to provide a short, scheduled time for communicating any
roadblocks to progress, interesting information, status updates, and
desire for help.

With the distributed teams I've been part of a daily stand-up still
played an important role. The team joined a video conference and we
gathered around a shared Google Doc that had prompts similar to the
snippet below.

[TODO: Images]

```
Day: 2016-07-11

Whats interesting?

Want help?

Meetings

```

These prompts provided a starting point for team members to add in
additional text. Our stand-ups were at the beginning of the day, so
frequently team members would add text to the document at the end of
the prior day. Filling in the document at the end of the day instead
of right before the stand-up was useful as memories and thoughts were
often fresher without having to remember them the following morning.

After being filled in, the document would look like below.

```
Day: 2016-07-11

What's interesting?
  - New deploy lowered response time by 20% - Jake
  - Discovered bug in datetime library around checking if datetime is within interval - Sue
  - Greg joined the team!
  - Adding blocker functionality going to take longer than expected. Guessing another 2 days - Donald

Want help?
  - Having difficulties recreating running batch process locally. - Tom
  - I'm having a hard time understanding propensity calculation - Mike

Meetings
  - API overview with client @ 2 PM
```

At the start of our day, we would gather around the Google Doc and
everyone would take a couple of minutes to silently read. If anyone
felt like something was worth talking about they would **bold** the
text and then we'd work from the top to bottom and have a quick
discussion. For our `Want help?` section we'd solicit volunteers and
move on. The `Meetings?` section was primarily there to provide
visibility to the entire team times when certain members might not be
available. After we worked through the `Want help?` section we'd pop
over to Trello and review the work in progress and make sure everyone
had an idea of what they would be working on.

The nice thing about doing a stand-up around a shared Google Doc is
that you can put in richer media than just text. Screenshots of
monitoring graphs were a common addition to the `What's interesting?`
section.

Every day a new section was added to the top of the Google Doc and the
previous day was pushed lower on the page. Having this written history
of stand-ups was useful as it allowed us to notice patterns through a
persisted medium instead of relying on our memory. It also let someone
who was on vacation come back and have an idea of what had happened
while they were gone. Below is what the document would look like on
the next day (comments removed to keep the example shorter).

```
Day: 2016-07-12

What's interesting?
  - [...]

Want help?
  - [...]

Meetings
  - [...]

-------
Day: 2016-07-11

What's interesting?
  - [...]

Want help?
  - [...]

Meetings
  - [...]
```

This is just an example from one of the teams I worked with. Another
team used the following prompts.

```
1. Accomplished Yesterday

2. Requires Attention/Roadblocks

3. Scope Creep Alerts

4. Would like to Do Today
```

The important thing is to find something that works for your
team. Different teams are going to prefer different formats.

Another interesting benefit of using a Google Doc to drive your
stand-up is that it can be visible to other teams. You can even
combine teams into a single document. Below is an example with two
teams in a single document.

```
**Everyone**
  - 

**Team Events**
  1. Accomplished Yesterday
     - [...]
  2. Requires Attention/Roadblocks
     - [...]
  3. Scope Creep Alerts
     - [...]
  4. Would like to do today
     - [...]

**Team Engine**
What's interesting?
  -
Want help?
  -
Meetings
  -
``` 

I've seen this work successfully with five related teams in a single
document. News and information that affected everyone was put in the
**Everyone** section. Team information ended up in the team
sections. Each team had their own stand-up that looked at just their
section but because their section was part of a larger document
everyone got a taste of what was going on in the other related
teams. This helped replace the random hallway chatter you get in a
shared office and gave everyone a slightly broader picture.

## Stand-downs

Stand-downs are an informal meeting that provide a time to informally
chat with your team. I've seen them used as an end-of-day optional
water cooler activity for a team to chat about whatever they feel
like. These chats often happen, but are unscheduled, in an office.

These meetings should be an optional, short time scheduled near the
end of the day. This gives team members a good excuse (to chat with
their coworkers) to stop working (which helps with the problem of
overwork). No one should feel pressured to be at these meetings.

Maybe the conversation is about something work related. Maybe its
about some langauge feature someone learned. Perhaps its just talking
about some book. It doesn't matter what is discussed, these meetings
can help a team get closer.

## Meeting recommendations

## Remote Pair Programming

[Pair programming](http://c2.com/xp/PairProgramming.html) is a
technique that often people employ when working in person. It works
even better when remote and helps solve some of the difficulties of
working remotely.

Remote pair programming helps fight the feeing of loneliness and
isolation that some remote workers feel. Remote pairing forces intense
interaction between two people. It also helps keep the two people
focused on the work. It is easy for a single person to get distracted
by endless Hacker News browsing but much harder for both people to get
sucked into it.

The best co-located pair programming setup is when you take a single
machine and hook up two large monitors, two keyboards, and two mice
and then mirror the monitors. This lets both programmers use their own
keyboard and stare straight ahead at their own monitor.

Remote pair programming is an even better setup. One developer, the
host, somehow shares their environment with the other developer. This
can be done through screen sharing using Zoom, screen hero, VNC,
tmate, or some other way. The important part is that both developers
can see the code and, if necessary, some way of viewing a UI.

Like the ideal local pair programming environment, each developer has
their own keyboard, mouse, and monitor. Unlike the local pair
programming environment they each also have their own computer. This
allows one developer look up documentation on their computer while the
host developer continues to write code. It also allows the non-host
developer to shield the host from distractions like answering
questions in the chat room or responding to emails.

It is easier for the non-host developer to checkout and distract
themself. It is easier to be rude and not pay attention to you pair
when you are not sitting next to them. If you notice your pair has
zoned out, nicely call them out on it or ask them a question to get
them reengaged.

## One-on-ones

[One-on-ones](TODO LINK) are a useful practice in both a co-located
and distributed team. I'm not going to go into all the reasons they
are useful as their is plenty of documentation around that
online. Instead, I'll describe why I've found them to be even more
useful in a distributed team.

With a distributed team you lose out on a lot of the body language you
can pick up on when in person. It is harder to tell when someone is
frustrated or when a pair is not working well together. Burn out is
harder to notice. One-on-ones provide a time for that information to
come out. 

## Chat rooms

Chat room applications (IRC, Slack, HipChat, etc) are pretty
great. They provide a medium of communication that has a lower barrier
to entry than email. Chat tools definitely have a place in the
distributed teams tool chest.

The chat room becomes even more central to work once you start
including useful bots in the room. These bots can perform many
functions. You can just look at the [Slack App Directory](TODO Link)
to see some of the many bots that people are producing.

For a certain class of automated messages I'd recommend setting up a
separate channel (or chat room) [TODO: what is the right language
here, something universal?]. This room can be dedicated to certain
types of automated messages. These messages tend to be ones that are
useful to see periodically but you don't want cluttering up your main
channel. Often these types of messages are something that happen
frequently, such as git commits or Trello card updates. It is nice to
see them in a single spot but they should not be able to interrupt
conversation.

Chat rooms can also be a big time sink. They are one more source of
concentration interrupting notifications. The feeling of missing out
on conversation can drive some people to join a large number of
channels. They also give a feeling of immediacy that isn't actually
there.

Despite having search functionality, it is often difficult to find a
previous conversation in chat applications. If something important is
said in a chat room that causes a change in direction, or some other
noticable change (TODO: What other changes?), I'd recommend extracting
it from chat application and recording the decision somewhere else.

I'd also recommend turning off notifications for all but most definite
"someone is trying to reach me" triggers. Encourage members of your
chat to use entire channel notifications sparingly and only for
messages that immediately need everyone's attention. There are not
many messages that immediately require everyone's attention.

It can also be a challenge to follow chat conversations, especially if
they span a larger unit of time. Don't be afraid to move a
conversation to email or another medium that is better suited for
longer discussions.

Many chat solutions offer the ability to have private rooms or direct
messaging to a user. Don't be afraid of using these private
communications but before communicating something ask if it should be
in a public room. It can be difficult to ask a question and admit you
don't know something but seeing that dialogue might help
others. Similarily, having discussions about a feature, bug, or task can
help spread knowledge.

## Email

Despite all of the efforts to replace email; email is still useful. It
is the common form of communication between companies, it is
pervasive, and it usually has pretty good search.

A good email thread can keep a topic contained in a form that is
possible to follow. Unlike a chat room, there aren't off-topic
interjections from uninvolved parties.

## Phone

You shouldn't be afraid of calling someone. Just recognize that this
is an interruption. Have a directory of telephone numbers for
employees that is accessible everyone.

The downside of phone conversations it that they aren't automatically
persisted. It can be worth following up a phone discussion with an
email summarizing the discussion and the next steps.

## Picking the right communication medium

When you are working on a distributed team you no longer can walk over
to someone's desk and interrupt them. This is great. Not every
question deserves an immediate answer.

Agree with your team when to use different forms of communication. Set
expectations with regards to response times and urgency for different
mediums. Maybe direct chat messages are expected to be responded to
under 10 minutes. Perhaps emails are ok having a delay of a few
hours. This is something your group will need to decide.

## Meetup in person

You should have your distributed team or company meet in person. This
shouldn't happen too regularly; I think ideally this would happen two
or three times a year. While collaborating remotely is possible there
is still some magic that happens when you occasionally meet in person.

You can use this time to do the typical day-to-day work but I think it
is more productive to try other activities. I've seen these in person
meetups be successful when they were used times to focus on group
discussion. This can take the form of a mini-conference
or [Open Space](http://openspaceworld.org/wp2/what-is/). Another
option is to brainstorm some potentially wild ideas and try
implementing them to see how far you can get.

Use this time to have some meals with your collegues and get to know
them as more than someone inside your computer. This can help with
communication and understanding personalities.

# Recommendations


# Other references

- Book: Remote by Jason Fried and DHH
- Zapier has a pretty good remote guide
- Paul Stadig blog post
- Tim's recommendations

# Acknowledgements

[^1]: Though, you may want to pay for Internet or provide a budget to help remote employees setup their home office.
