---
layout: page
title: about
sharing: false
---

{% img left /images/jake-surprised-eyes-brighter.jpg 300 Picture of Jake McCrary %}

I'm an experienced software developer. I enjoy coming up with simple
solutions to seemingly complex problems. I've proven to be a reliable
technology leader that can be depended on to understand business
requirements, make technology choices, and make teams better through
mentoring and growing team members.

I currently work at [Outpace](http://outpace.com) developing marketing
tools.

Before rejoining Outpace, I was the CTO
at [Lumanu](https://lumanu.com). While I was there, Lumanu scoured the
web for articles and extracted useful data. That data was used to both
help authors create better content and help marketers build
relationships with content creators. I set architecture direction,
made technology choices, set business direction, talked to potential
investors, dealt with third-party vendors, helped with recruiting, and
provided guidance across the data science and software engineering
teams.

Previously I worked at [DRW Trading](http://drw.com). At DRW I spent
my time writing research tools, trading systems (latency sensitive and
non-latency sensitive), and more.

I've worked on a range of problems using a variety of technologies and
methodologies. I've found testing to be critical to delivering quality
software.

I've presented at [AIT Workshop](http://lanyrd.com/2016/aitworkshop/)
and speakerconf, two invite only conferences, and the Chicago Clojure
group. Topics have included distributed teams, machine learning, and
web development.

I've worked professionally in more languages than I can
remember. Since 2014 most my development has been in Clojure and
ClojureScript. Prior to that I worked in Java, C#, C++, C, Q, Perl,
Python, Ruby, JavaScript, Clojure, ClojureScript, Haskell, Emacs Lisp,
Scala and VBA. I've found writing in a functional style leads to
easier to reason about code.

When not coding I try to be active, mostly focusing on rock climbing
and sailing. I've hiked to the top of [Mount Kilimanjaro](/kili.html)
and have sailed multiple times in the
[Chicago to Mackinac](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago_to_Mackinac_Boat_Race)
race. In the 2013 and 2015 race the boat I crewed on, Talisman, placed
second in our fleet.

The best way to contact me is through
[email](mailto:jake@jakemccrary.com). I can also be found on
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/jakemcc),
[Github](https://github.com/jakemcc),
[LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/in/jakemccrary), and
[Goodreads](http://www.goodreads.com/user/show/3431614-jake-mccrary).

